This directory includes scripts for our application of three distinct strategies for estimating the timing of the onset of admixture in Cabo Verde: ALDER (Loh et al., 2013), MultiWaver 2.0 (Ni et al., 2019), and a method based on patterns of linkage disequilibrium between local ancestry tracts (Zaitlen et al., 2017). We first converted the genotypes to EIGENSTRAT format using convertf (Patterson, Price, & Reich, 2006; Price et al., 2006). We then used ALDER to date admixture timing on each island using default parameters with mindis  =  0.005 and source populations GWD and IBS. We ran MultiWaver using the ancestry tracts inferred by RFMix, default parameters, and 100 bootstraps. Finally, we followed the pipeline of Zaitlen et al. (2017) and its accompanying scripts to use the RFMix local ancestry calls to measure local ancestry disequilibrium (LAD) decay in 10 Mb windows, overlapping by 1 Mb. Specifically, we started with the first SNP on each autosome, used the 10 Mb window end point to identify the SNP closest to the inside of this boundary, and then used local ancestry calls at these positions to determine LAD. We repeated this process along each chromosome to obtain LAD in 279 autosomal windows. Using possible values of admixture generations ranging from 5-25, we determined the best fit using island-specific mean LAD decay over the 279 autosomal windows, assortative mating parameters estimated with ANCESTOR (see below), a starting autosomal admixture proportion of 0.65, and either no migration or with migration (migration rate = 0.01).
